David Baker (00:00)
Welcome to Straight From the Heart because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I'm here with David Hart, founder of Ram Air. David, how are doing today?

David Hart (00:09)
Great, thanks, morning Dave, how you doing?

David Baker (00:11)
What's going on in Oregon? What's happening this week? Keepin' busy?

David Hart (00:15)
Everything.

It's Memorial Day weekend. And this is a resort town here in Bend where I live. So it is packed out there. But yeah.

David Baker (00:18)
right.

Well, listen, today we're gonna talk about ⁓ HVAC cleaning should be part of any restoration project, right? ⁓ It seems like axiomatic, like of course, but talk to me why people don't think that way and why would they should think that way?

David Hart (00:30)
Absolutely.

You know, this is something ⁓ that becomes more and more of something about which we talk as an industry. You know, I've been doing this for like 30 years in the cleaning and restoration industry. Started Ram Air 18 years ago. That's when Positive Air Deck Cleaning was born, actually 18 years ago. And more and more, all the time, I'm finding this topic coming up finally.

the restoration industry is waking up to the fact that, yeah, we need to include the lungs of the building into the restoration process. You know, I go to around.

David Baker (01:16)
I don't understand that. Like,

like they would clean the whole place, but then leave HVAC alone. I mean, is that even possible? Why would they do that?

David Hart (01:24)
Well, ⁓ the experience convention in Las Vegas, which is the biggest cleaning and restoration convention in the United States, possibly even the world every year, it's in Las Vegas coming up this September. In fact, ⁓ I did a presentation a couple years ago on this topic and it was all restorers and cleaners out in the audience. And I just, I don't even know if they knew that my topic was HVAC at this point, because what the name of the presentation was panel of experts.

There were five of us. There was ⁓ two PhDs, Jeff Jones, ⁓ Barry Costa, and myself. And as soon as I got up on the stage, I asked the audience, said, what in your experience is the most ignored or improperly done portion of every restoration job you've ever known? And lot of hands went up and I started pointing to people, HVAC, HVAC, HVAC. It was the only answer, and it's the correct answer.

It's been the most ignored portion. Most restoration jobs that I've been on prior to my getting involved in it, the HVAC wasn't even done. And that doesn't make any sense. It's part of the structure. Now, at Microbial Warrior, we always mention structure and contents, right? And indoor air quality, those three things, right? Now, the indoor air quality, of course, is largely affected by the structure and contents. But what is the HVAC?

David Baker (02:35)
Yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

David Hart (02:50)
The HVAC is part of the structure and it's also a content. And it's the portion of the structure responsible for moving the air throughout the entire structure. Now when you're moving the air, what else are you moving? Whatever's in the air. You're moving contaminants. So to not include it on every single restoration job, whether it be smoke, crime scene, unintended death, homicide, suicide, illicit drug, mold.

⁓ You're just not doing the job completely.

David Baker (03:22)
Why wasn't it done before? Is it because they just didn't have the equipment? That's not what they do? Or they couldn't bill for it? It's extra work, it wouldn't be ⁓ charged through insurance? What was the primary reason? Yeah. Yeah.

David Hart (03:36)
Those are all good points, Dave. think it's a little bit of all of those. And

I'm going to start with the most recent one you said, and that was the billing points. ⁓ Xactimate, a lot of restoration companies, dare I say most, go with Xactimate. And ⁓ until recently, there was only two Xactimate line items for HVAC cleaning and decontamination. Now, Bob Jordan, who was with the ⁓ one of our interviews, ⁓ he and I worked together on doubling the number of

David Baker (04:02)
Yeah, right.

David Hart (04:06)
line items in Xactimate for HVAC. So from two to four, okay? But that's still heck of a lot better.

David Baker (04:12)
Yeah. Let's make a big difference then. Now you

can get paid for the work you do. You and any, yeah, yeah. Get paid well.

David Hart (04:17)
And well and well in fact

that's a let's touch on that because that's very important I want to touch on that but but more to your most recent question. Why has it been ignored? I think a lot of it is also out of sight out of mind You know when you see ⁓ somebody and they got skin cancer You know it you can see it or lip cancer anything like this lung cancer They can't see you know and that like I say it is the lungs of the building. It's very important

One might even say that the lungs are ⁓ one of the most important parts of the body. Well, the HVAC system is one of the most important parts of the structure. I think it's been a combination of, first of all, there hasn't been the methodology in order to do it. ⁓ The traditional way of cleaning HVAC systems ⁓ has been shown to exacerbate the issue because it's pulling ⁓

David Baker (04:47)
Yeah.

David Hart (05:15)
makeup air from the structure into the ducts as it's doing it. You just, never catch up. You're constantly recontaminating what you're cleaning. So until very recently, within the last year, the methodology hasn't been adopted. Now, when Jeff Jones of Microbial Warrior asked me to write the standards and come up with the methodology for a forensic restoration of HVAC ⁓ in which mold falls because, you know, it's a biocontaminant. ⁓

We came into this very room right here, my lab assistant and I, and we spent two months and we just hammered out ⁓ the process for decontamination recheck and we nailed it, made it bulletproof.

David Baker (05:59)
And what are restoration professionals saying now? Now that they're getting, they have the Xactimate codes, now that it's becoming more expected to clean the lungs of the building, ⁓ they now they can fold it in, they can have equipment that's easier to manage and run and use and more profitable. Are you seeing ⁓ traction in the restoration professionals?

David Hart (06:22)
big time, big time. For example, when I was at that panel at the experience a couple years ago and I mentioned it and everybody said HVAC is the most ignored. And then I came back with, know, it's also very important and needs to be done. I could see the heads nodding in the audience. Everybody knows. We all know that it has to be done.

David Baker (06:39)
I'll agree. Yeah. So you're

gonna speak again at the experience, right? This fall. What's the topic?

David Hart (06:45)
I am this September. Yeah. Yep. Yep.

It's an exciting one. ⁓ It's in regard to a research paper that was published by the Cleaning Industry Research Institute. They have a biannual journal that comes out called the Journal of Cleaning Science. And it's a very serious scientific ⁓ journal. And the cover story, the cover story of that journal actually is a research paper that covers exactly what we're talking about, methodologies of HVAC cleaning.

David Baker (06:51)
Okay.

Wow.

Wow.

David Hart (07:19)
And

the presentation is going to be on that. I'm going to be ⁓ on stage with John Miles, who is the chief science officer for Superstratum, fantastic company that makes mold decontamination chemistry. he's also his career prior to that position was in the flex duct manufacturing sector. He was actually on the team that designed the very adhesive with which flex ducting is made. So you could say that.

out of this man and a handful of others know more about flex duct adhesive than anybody literally in the world. And I'm going to be honored by sharing the stage with him at this presentation. It's going to be a really cool presentation.

David Baker (07:58)
That's fantastic. you think he

could join ⁓ our series here at one point? It'd be nice to have him on.

David Hart (08:04)
I am confident

that I've actually spoken with him. He's eager to do so,

David Baker (08:10)
Terrific,

that's terrific, thank you. Well, that's great. we should be, ⁓ that's a little teaser for what's coming, because is it published now or it's soon to be published officially?

David Hart (08:19)
It just

came out this, what's today, Friday? It just came out four days ago, yeah. It is out. In fact, I didn't even know it had come out yet. I was watching every day to see when it was gonna come out, because I knew that that had made the cover story, and I'm like, okay, I gotta watch this. I got a phone call out of the blue from Barry Costa. He said, congratulations, your research paper just came out. I'm like, holy crap, thanks, Right? Yeah.

David Baker (08:25)
So it's out, it's out, it's live.

Okay.

You weren't pregnant, huh?

that's fantastic. So he's the one that broke the news to you. You got it from Barry. Well, that's fantastic. Well, we should start talking about this next week. Maybe we can start to unpack that a little bit more because it's big news. It's going to be a seismic shift in how ⁓ HVAC companies approach ⁓ HVAC lending.

David Hart (08:50)
Yeah, yeah, good old Barry, man. Barry's the coolest. Love that guy.

It.

And that is not an

exaggeration. It's actually being called the most, ⁓ the bomb, the biggest bomb ever dropped. And not a bad bomb. I mean, it's a good bomb. It's an informational bomb. right. ⁓ The biggest informational bomb dropped on the HVAC cleaning industry in history. ⁓ So it's pretty cool stuff.

David Baker (09:16)
Yeah, love bomb, I love bomb.

Well, I can't wait to talk about it with you. Have a great Memorial weekend. Enjoy your boat, enjoy your weather and look forward to talking to you next week about the bomb.

David Hart (09:39)
And you as well, Dave. Thank you much.

David Baker (09:41)
Thanks, David.

