John Miles (00:17.292)
Hey David, you there? Can you hear me? Yes, I'm here. I I'm trying to I've never used river side and it's asking me a lot of different to close out of I don't like I don't know what it's

David Baker (00:18.703)
Yes. John, are you there?

David Baker (00:35.109)
Yeah, I got a message that says John's mic is and cam are already in use. Ask them to close it's all apps, whatever that means. Yeah.

John Miles (00:40.598)
Yes. I don't know what that

Right. yeah. But I don't know what the only a the only other is my Windows I can or or not Windows, but Google. Let me see if I close that. If that allows it.

David Baker (01:03.564)
hmm.

Weird. Yeah. I can hear you obviously, so your mic is fine. Can you turn on your video?

John Miles (01:15.628)
That's what it's it's it's like you can turn off the camera while recording but you can't switch cameras.

David Baker (01:17.273)
Not letting you.

David Baker (01:25.183)
you wanna just restart your computer and maybe that's the clean way to do it. I don't know.

John Miles (01:29.868)
Yeah, let's see what I can do here.

David Baker (01:31.768)
Okay, yeah.

John Miles (01:35.288)
Be right back. Is David is you and I gonna be is is is David Hart gonna be on this too? Okay. Okay.

David Baker (01:35.865)
No hurry, no hurry. We'll be here. No problem.

David Baker (01:41.721)
Yeah, Dave's gonna join us. He's usually early and he gives me a hard time for being late, so it's my turn to give him a hard time.

John Miles (01:47.118)
There we go. Alright, let me try this.

David Baker (02:00.933)
Test, test, test. Mm-hmm.

David Baker (02:06.693)
Test, test, test, test. Looks pretty good.

David Baker (02:17.967)
Hmm.

David Baker (02:23.096)
Yeah.

David Hart (02:25.687)
Morning guys, sorry I'm a few minutes late.

David Baker (02:28.485)
Well.

David Baker (02:32.48)
I'm just I'm just laughing at the periodic table. That's all.

David Hart (02:35.497)
shit, do I still have this thing on? crap. Okay.

That's that's my normal attire. I guess I should professionalize a little bit here for for this. Yes.

David Baker (02:45.027)
Yeah, or pretend, yeah. He John had John was having some trouble. So he was rebooting his computer and and joining back up in a second here. So the technical difficulties.

David Hart (02:52.973)
We're having technical difficulties. can you put can you I'll be back in one second.

David Baker (02:58.063)
Sure. You wait. Just stay there. I mean, but just run it. It's all good. You're back already.

David Hart (03:06.541)
Tun.

David Baker (04:16.655)
So you went from I'm not ready for LinkedIn now to let's go with LinkedIn. Hold on, let's go to LinkedIn in like three hours. Is that just because Carrie is so compelling? Probably.

David Hart (04:22.36)
Well

David Hart (04:31.682)
Well, you know, I got to thinking about it and I knew how much it meant to you. No, I'm just kidding. Well, no, because it I mean it might sound like grandiose for me to talk about how important II CRC is, but really, I mean, if have you seen the way these people treat I I mean, every single day I see post after post, people are like, Hey, look at my I CRC certificate. They're huge, they're all over the world, they're the biggest

David Baker (04:37.189)
Ha ha ha.

David Hart (04:59.628)
certification body for cleaning and restoration in the world. And if they adopt positive air dog cleaning and let's say bring us on as an instructor, dude, it's I the minute that happens, I'm going on helicopter trader. I'm looking for my from an for buying a helicopter. You know, and it's not just about money. I'm I'm talking about how we will have impacted the industry to the point where now and I think this paper and and backing like like did you see what Kerry Lesage wrote?

David Baker (05:15.439)
You could pick it up.

David Baker (05:19.255)
I gotcha, I gotcha, I gotcha. I know.

David Baker (05:29.209)
Yeah. I mean detailed. yeah, she did

David Hart (05:30.232)
Dude, that killer. And she's super highly respected. She's super highly respected. She knows a lot of people. And and so I think rather than me posting it on there, hey, look what I did. You know what I'm saying? It just it means more. Yeah. And so and it just kind of clicked in me. I thought, well, you know what? Well, let me see if I can make this happen. And she actually offered to well, she said, she said, you ought to post it on LinkedIn and I'll share it. I said, I tell you what, you post it on LinkedIn and I'll share it. I had no idea she was gonna say all the awesome things she did.

David Baker (05:40.697)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Fair. A hundred percent. Yeah, a hundred percent.

David Baker (05:56.889)
Yeah. And she did. but she went in detail. It was great. Yeah, it was terrific.

David Hart (06:01.74)
Yeah. D now do you know her personally out outside of this?

David Baker (06:05.379)
We've met briefly. She wouldn't remember me, but I I remember. Yeah. Actually I we met first time when you did the panel of experts.

David Hart (06:07.03)
Okay, so you have.

David Hart (06:14.647)
That's when I met her in person the first time too. Actually, it's the only time we've met in person. And I was really impressed with her articulation and just how personable and fun she is. She's just a really super cool lady. I mean, she's the kind of person I could like not just do business stuff with, but go hang out for the evening and have a good old time. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we were sitting at a table and I I was there were stiffs like like Jeff Jones and Barry Costa at the table. You know what I'm saying? I'm kidding.

David Baker (06:22.905)
Yeah. Right.

David Baker (06:28.813)
Right. Totally. Totally. Right. That's your ecosystem. It's a beautiful ecosystem. I love it.

shoot.

I know. Yeah.

David Hart (06:42.69)
Ki kinda. Hey. How's it going, John?

David Baker (06:43.321)
Hey, it's working. There he is.

John Miles (06:45.625)
Yeah, finally got to work here.

David Baker (06:48.623)
Terrific.

David Hart (06:48.962)
Lo look at him. Look at him.

Now Dave Dave's gonna tell you how to sit and how to all that.

David Baker (06:53.921)
All right. I am. Yeah, I'm gonna say if you could back up a little bit. Try we'll try to get all of our heads in and David Hart, you could lean in a little bit. Well I can I can always I can I can expand it. That's okay. Yeah, but try to perfect. That's perfect. You see your just sort of shiny forehead.

John Miles (07:01.379)
evenly.

David Hart (07:08.141)
How's that?

John Miles (07:08.849)
you

David Hart (07:14.146)
John John missed my what I was gonna wear. I came on with this and and David Baker's like, No, that's not professional. I'm whatever, dude. I didn't realize this was such a stiff show, you know.

John Miles (07:22.006)
That's not working.

David Baker (07:27.171)
That's a stiff show. Although that you that would work. It would certainly would get eyeballs. There's no doubt about that. John, nice to meet you. It's nice to meet you. Yeah, thanks for thanks for taking time to to to chat about the the paper. It's really exciting. Really exciting stuff. Yeah. let's let's let's talk show order a little bit. Here's what I was thinking, guys. let's let's just kind of walk it through a little bit, just get the scaffolding, and then we can go in. We'll try to keep it conversational, but I wanted some structure to it.

David Hart (07:34.936)
You gotta play the goof card. Yeah.

John Miles (07:35.641)
Nice meeting you too, David.

John Miles (07:41.732)
Excellent.

David Baker (07:57.63)
so my thought was I'll do a quick intro. I'll introduce David and then

David Hart (08:04.14)
Which yeah, David, you're not gonna introduce yourself. Okay, never mind, sorry.

David Baker (08:06.165)
Yeah, yes. Hello. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Please. silence all phones, please. And David, what I would love for you to do is just give a quick, you know, I'm gonna say, hey, you know, this is great. Exciting this paper's come out. Yeah, you know, y say something about the reaction you're getting and how excited it's really you know, whatever you wanna say about it.

And then in a nutshell, give me like one sentence on what it is. Don't go into it yet. Just give me like what's what's what's the paper and what do we what you know, kind of like something we've been working negative negative air, which has been industry standard. I whatever you want to say. Whatever you want. I just what I'm saying is I just want you introduce the paper quickly, but

David Hart (08:46.21)
Well, I could just introduce it by the by its title, which is structural incompatibility of negative air cleaning in flexible HVAC duct systems.

David Baker (08:53.059)
Yeah, and even the and in the abstract, that first sentence in the abstract is pretty good. So you can say that, but I I don't think I'll need you to read it as much as you can if you want to. But I want to get through it quickly because you have a way with like long in elongating your sentences or or paragraphs. Okay. But but then I'll have you introduce John. I think that that that format works pretty well. I introduce you, you you're you're with me, and then you d introduce John. You you talk about how you work together, whatever.

David Hart (09:09.462)
It's called babbling. It's called rambling. You

David Baker (09:22.245)
the why it's important to have him on and why it's important to get his his take on the results of this report. And then we go into it. And then John, you could you can say hello. And then we're not going to do backgrounds quite yet. I wanna you can look you can lead into it into the with in the story, but I kind of want to jump right in and get at it. so the first question would be like, well what is what is negative air duct cleaning? What are flexible duct systems and why are they incompatible? That's our first one.

Think that's it. So my thought was that's the first one. You just just structurally, why they're different. You know, you talk about, you know, I get the notes in there. Like, why do flex duct, why does that not work with the negative error alone? Second, then once we get into that, I'll we'll get into like, okay, well, what are the consequences? What are the failure modes? You could talk, and I think I think there's three failure modes, right? Isn't that what you guys discussed? Or is there one that has two implications? I couldn't really tell.

David Hart (10:20.3)
What what what l what are the three as you understand them, David?

David Baker (10:24.711)
I have them in the notes here. I got

David Baker (10:31.199)
adhesive scene peeling and delamination, linear collapse, and perforations in holes. Are those is it is it correct to think of three or is it two or does it one with Okay. Okay. Around the wire coal.

David Hart (10:43.029)
The first one for sure. The first one for sure. Linear collapse. I don't know, Dave, Dave, what do you what are your thoughts on? I mean sorry I'm sorry, John, what are your thoughts on?

John Miles (10:52.303)
Yeah, mean, that's the pressure of the polyester pushing on the wire will expand in and the wire is not going to move. It's structurally forced, but once it relaxes, it's going to have natural pull. One side is going to go back to its original state and the other one is going to try to stay there. Then adhesive has got to withstand those forces.

David Hart (11:21.623)
That's why you need to be the guy answering that question. I I I I couldn't have borden like that, yeah.

David Baker (11:23.715)
And then the third one was perforations or holes. And we could talk about it proportionately if it's if it's predominantly, you know, adhesive scene peeling and delamination. If that's primarily the thing, you know, we can lean into that. We can also talk parenthetically about the other two, linear collapse or

David Hart (11:38.539)
You know, you know, John, in my opinion, the holes and whatnot, I to me that's kind of a s the only reason that would really happen is because I mean, when you have two layers of something that are stuck together, for lack of a better term, it's going to be stronger than if there's a small separation between the two. Just why that's exactly why I can rip a phone book in half. And good God, I wish we had one right here. I'd show it because if you s if you separate the pages and create a little space in between each page, you can rip it in half. Try to f

Dude, Arnold Schwarzenegger can't rip a phone book in half that's all tight. And you know what I mean, John, right? So by the the space, maybe that's what creates those holes. Would you concur with that? In fact, I just now thought of this. Does that make sense?

John Miles (12:09.989)
Yeah, totally.

John Miles (12:16.729)
Yes, and also the mechanical brushing of that environment under that negative, that still that negative pressure. Yeah, whatever. I don't know all the different types of.

David Hart (12:26.133)
Or even whipping. Whipping I think is even harsher than Russian.

David Baker (12:30.789)
Hold on a second on the whipping. So hold on a second because according to a sh here's what I you tell me if this is not good, but what I was thinking is it's the the structurally it's flex ducks were not designed for negative air pressure. That's point one. Point two is the consequences of that. You get the delamination, you get the wire, and then you got the whole the holes, whatever. The third thing, and do we want to talk about the the mechanical side? Because the report says that that's the predominant.

Problem. That's where the most damage comes from, the mechanical agitation.

David Hart (12:59.905)
Well, I would say that the pressure itself does the delamination. The agitation, okay, mechanical agitation exacerbates that. And what not, John?

John Miles (13:07.825)
That's correct. Yes, that's exactly what's happened.

David Baker (13:10.421)
Okay. But but from the order, we're gonna talk about the pressure first. Okay. And then we'll get in then we're gonna that's gonna roll into then mechanical. Is

David Hart (13:20.821)
Actually this is really good. This should be recorded. Yeah, this is we're doing it. Okay.

David Baker (13:23.297)
It is recorded. It is recorded. So if we use if we need to use any any cuts, we can. We'll we'll we can edit it together. And if you if it's if you at point some point stumble, just pause and start your sentence over thinking, well, that's a good place where I would do a cut. So I can just lean lean right into it. so it's designed Flex Duck is not designed for negative air. There are consequences because the negative air pressure. That's number two.

Number three, we get into that okay, there's also mechanical agitation. So it's not just the air, but it's also mechanical agitation. David, positive air positive air product cleaning doesn't have the same mechanical is it is that a difference?

David Hart (14:00.211)
It does have the same does have the same mechanical agitation, which can be in the form of either air blast by way of a skipper ball, whip, or brush. And we do implement all three of those in different circumstances. And by the way, I just want to point out real quick, flex duct was never meant to be put under negative pressure beyond what it would normally experience in a return duct. Okay. It can handle a certain amount, just not a whole hell of a lot.

David Baker (14:18.383)
Fair, right, right, right, right. That's the point. Right. Sure, sure, sure, sure. Yeah. Yeah. Well, here's my point about the mechanical. Do we really want to spend yes, it's true, but whether you do it positively or whether you do it negatively, you're still gonna get the mechanical. Do we talk about it all? Or is your point, well, you're gonna have the mechanical, but it's because of all the negative air pressure, then the mechanical exacerbates it. Mechanical alone isn't so bad.

David Hart (14:43.977)
It exacerbates it because if you think about it, because what you want to do is you wanna keep sorry. Yeah.

David Baker (14:45.999)
But hold on, hold on, here's listen to my point. I want I w I want my make my point clear. Mechanical alone is not a problem. Mechanical alone does not destroy the duct. Mechanical alone is not an issue. It's because the negative air pressure on top of the mechanical. Is that true?

John Miles (14:59.919)
That's correct.

David Hart (15:00.791)
I would say that's true and I would add to that that negative pressure alone can and does. It's just that the it's just that the agitation exacerbates it. You know, because if it

David Baker (15:06.906)
Okay.

David Baker (15:11.041)
Right. Well in it but my the reason I'm bringing this up, this is important. The reason I'm bringing it up is you also have mechanical. So someone might conclude, well positive error is mechanical too, so either way. So I just wanna make sure we don't we might make that clear. If we're gonna go into mechanical, why is it why 'cause

David Hart (15:23.904)
Right.

John Miles (15:26.607)
Right, and I want you guys to...

David Hart (15:27.755)
Because you well y you're never nobody's ever gonna nobody's ever gonna clean a duct by simply subjecting subjecting it to pressures either positive or negative. There's always gonna be mechanical adaptation implemented. You were gonna say something, John?

David Baker (15:39.685)
Okay. So someone else might say don't clean them though. So but that's what's happening.

John Miles (15:40.175)
Yeah, one of the reasons is the fact that, you know, if you're thinking of my hands being the layers on the duct that are in this tube, okay, and the wires wrap around. In that particular phase, when you put the vacuum on it and it unseparates itself, now you've got this flapping piece of polyester that's standing there, and then when that mechanical whip comes around, what's it do? It grabs it.

David Hart (15:44.651)
That's what the EPA says.

David Baker (16:04.805)
There go. There you go. That's what I want. Because then the positive doesn't get there, so the mechanical is not a problem. But because you've had the delamination and the pull apart, then the mechanical is a problem. Be okay. Okay, then we can do it. You you guys both rock.

John Miles (16:17.103)
That's exactly right.

David Hart (16:23.415)
We're just trying to keep up with you, ma'am.

David Baker (16:24.069)
then so just to just be clear, we're gonna talk about structurally, it's not there for negative air. here are the things that can go wrong with negative air pressure. And then after with since these things can go wrong, then you do mechanical can really be a problem because you've already, you know, whatever that is, you you it becomes a real big issue. The fourth thing is then, and the big issue of all this is that you don't see it.

As a as a homeowner, you or even as a contractor, you can't tell. You have you have no idea damage is going on underneath, right? So that's an easy next

David Hart (16:53.984)
You can't tell until you get the mold frickin' problem that's the result. Do you think I should have should I bring some of this on the camera at some point? I don't have any

David Baker (17:01.729)
I would love that at some yeah, huh? Yeah. I think

David Hart (17:05.044)
I don't have any that's damaged unfortunately. I send all that to the lab, but

David Baker (17:08.427)
If you want to illustrate a point, pull it out and show it. Rather than just holding up and like a like, hey, look, it's in my hand. This is a duct. Sh if you're trying to show like the circumference or bend it or something, then do that. Okay.

David Hart (17:12.156)
it it can't hurt to have it sitting next to me.

David Hart (17:21.816)
Well if I'm just gonna hold it up then I'll put the hat back on.

David Baker (17:24.611)
Sure, you can, whatever. It'll be fun. Okay. So we've talked. I'm gonna, I'm sorry for being repetitive, but it's gonna be design, then the problems with pressure, mechanical issues, and the the fourth thing is but but you can't see it. That's the that's a real that's the heartparting part. And if you don't see it, you don't address it, it can cause the fifth one is issues, right? You can have condensation, you can have mold, people get sick. It's a real problem, right?

David Hart (17:36.358)
Well

David Hart (17:49.706)
Yeah.

John Miles (17:50.469)
Well, you've now opened that environment that allows unconditioned air, high humidity, to be able to seep in to that cold environment. Because now that you have that little flap open, you've got cold air cooling on those wires, cooling on all those things. And if it can seep in there, will form on all those cold, you you can't bring a cold drink outside in the South without condensation form on it in seconds. And so the same thing will happen there.

David Baker (18:18.551)
And so if you have and then you have mold in the house, you you mitigate the house and you still have problems 'cause it's in the air ducts, right? You got mold in the air ducts. Okay. Okay.

John Miles (18:25.967)
Yes. Yeah, every time the air passes, new mold spores are being leached through the whole system.

David Baker (18:33.143)
Okay, so it's structurally designed.

David Hart (18:33.878)
You know, John keeps mentioning that he keeps mentioning that flap. You know, we have that in the article, there's that image from the lab that shows that. That'll be a good time maybe to show that image of that flap. 'Cause it shows that from the lab. Yeah.

David Baker (18:44.645)
That sounds good. Structural design problems, then it's negative air, the consequences of what negative air does. It's exacerbated by mechanical. the big problem is you can't see it. That's a real problem. And then the fifth is that, well, it caught it causes condensation, mold issues. There's all sorts of problems that can do be c come from this.

David Hart (19:05.93)
Yeah. And not just mold, but i contaminants alone, period, come in. Yeah.

David Baker (19:09.485)
Okay, great. That's number five. Number six is there are there are way there are ways you can mitigate against this. There are ways that if you're an egg of air duct cleaner, you can I didn't look at these, but you seem to suggest you told you said there's a number of things that you can do to but but of course you can do those things, but the problem is who's gonna do them? It becomes costly, maybe they're not quite as effective. It's still you still have you can miss. I don't know what the what your key points are, but that's okay, good, say it.

David Hart (19:23.808)
Yeah.

David Hart (19:33.97)
It would be asinine.

Yeah. And I'm gonna use that word.

David Baker (19:38.181)
So that's point number six. And then of course, seven is finally then well, what's the solution? Here's all the problems. You know, you can't really it's really not really doable. Positive airduct cleaning. That's the solution. That's that's a whole different way, that's a whole different approach, that's a whole different method. And you can talk about that. And then finally

David Hart (19:54.922)
You can sit there and put a gun to your head and pull the trigger, but you know what? You can also just go hundred and eighty degrees that way and no problem. I mean, you know, they're Yeah. Exactly.

David Baker (20:02.007)
And shoot somebody else. No, just I don't think we use that analogy. and then finally, if you want to talk about industry stand industry standards, like right now, there's no real delineation on duck cleaning. There's no real way. I don't know if you want to get into that, but I think it's a good one to talk about. Like where does a where does the industry going? Where should they go? Where should standards go? Of course, it's gonna support.

David Hart (20:08.716)
No, I'm not gonna use that analogy. No.

David Hart (20:27.415)
Yeah, and that's where we could even mention microbial warrior as like trailblazers in that they have implemented that into their standards. And you know.

David Baker (20:32.437)
Right. Great. Okay. I'll try to keep the, you know, we'll be editing this, but you know, so we go off, we can get back on. That's okay. So I'll start off with the show, introduction, and then I'll introduce you, David. You'll say hello. You're gonna get the buzz about the paper. What's it quick quick thing about what it's about, introduce John, and then we're on.

Sound good? All right. Sounds great. Not just good. Absolutely great. Give me one second here.

David Hart (20:56.736)
So great.

David Hart (21:05.398)
Have you ever seen the movie Jobs with Ashton Couture? Let me get one thing straight. We don't do fine.

David Baker (21:11.961)
We do great.

Welcome to Straight from the Heart, because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I'm David Baker. Most HVAC contractors see traditional air dire sorry.

Welcome to Straight from the Heart. Because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I don't want to say it that way. I'm going to do it again.

Welcome to Straight from the Heart, because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I'm David Baker. Because sorry, we haven't had this much trouble before.

David Hart (21:47.318)
You're being a little fast too.

David Baker (21:50.007)
Okay, slow down. Okay, good. I'm a little nervous. Welcome to Straight from the Heart.

David Hart (21:54.762)
The whole world's watching, man. Sorry.

with that.

David Baker (22:01.869)
Welcome to Straight from the Heart, because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I'm David Baker. Most HVAC contractors see traditional negative air cleaning as the standard for duct cleaning. But a new report shows negative air cleaning is structurally incompatible with flexible duct systems. Today we unpack what that means, what the lab found, and the implications it has for contractors who perform HVAC cleaning.

David Hardis, founder and CEO of Ram Air International and author of this new report. David, how are you doing today?

David Hart (22:37.557)
Great, thank you, David.

David Baker (22:39.075)
What's going on with this report? Are you getting some reaction to this breaking news?

David Hart (22:43.413)
Yeah. Yeah. It just came out, I'm gonna say roughly ten days ago and it's really making waves already. 'cause it's it's it's pretty profound. Yeah.

David Baker (22:49.583)
That's that's exciting.

Tell us before we get into it, we got a lot to cover, but and we have our guests we'll introduce, but before we do that, what's what's the gist of this report?

David Hart (23:00.777)
Okay, well I'll read you the title. it is structural incompatibility of negative air cleaning in flexible HVAC duct systems. And that's what the paper is about. It's about the negative air duct cleaning method, which was devised back in the 50s and has remained the traditional way of cleaning ducts, how it's incompatible with the ducting that's dominated structures since the 1980s, flex ducting. It was designed originally for metal ducting.

And then the implementation of flex ducting into the building of structures, the the methodology used in the cleaning did not evolve with it.

David Baker (23:38.149)
Great. Well that's a that's a big news because that's the most widely used method used, right? So before we get before we get into it, let's let's introduce our guest. Who do we have here today?

David Hart (23:44.393)
By far, by far.

David Hart (23:49.919)
John Miles. I've known John for years. Incredible guy. One of my favorite people in the industry. He's just a brainiac. he is formerly the way he's so impacting in this paper is because of a sentence that he said to me a couple of years ago in a meeting I was having with Superstratum, which is the company that makes the mold chemist mold decontamination chemistry that we use in our cleaning company. And

It's just knocked it out of the park for us every time. I love Superstratum. And we had a meeting with him and the CEO, Seth Jones. And out of the blue, because this is what scientists do, have a we have a blurting issue. We just happen to just say things as they pop into our heads. Out of the blue, he happens to say, David, you know, I really like the way that you clean HVAC systems because you use positive pressure. Flex ducting was never meant to be under negative pressure. And

John Miles (24:26.928)
you

David Hart (24:44.733)
All of a sudden it was like a record scratch. Okay. It's like, excuse me? could you say that again? And Seth Jones, the CEO of Superstratum, laughed. He goes, Yeah, I thought that might get your attention, David. I was like, Yeah, you got my attention, brother. Let's hear what you have to say. And then John went into this brilliant description of how flex ducting is made, because John actually was designed. you're gonna word this better than I did, John, but the adhesive, the seam seal adhesive with which flex ducting is made. So you could literally say,

John Miles (24:46.224)
and

David Hart (25:14.803)
That this guy knows more about seam seal adhesive with which flex acting is made than anybody in the world. And so, you know, what he had to say was was pretty important. And that's what started this whole research. anyway, I'm gonna turn it over to John. John, tell us about yourself.

John Miles (25:31.03)
Sure.

Name's John Miles. I'm a chemist by education. Went to the Citadel. Been in the adhesive, water-based adhesive development all my career, 35 years. So started off as technical service and developing different types of coatings, all basically water-based, and then into sales and sales management. But in that career, I worked with the polymer producer. I worked for polymer producers that manufactured the base polymer

sold to the adhesive manufacturers that sold that finished product onto the flexible duct markets. One of the characteristics, the main characteristics of a flexible duct and that adhesive, because it's a two and a half inch, two inch strip of polyester, so it has to have good adhesion to that polyester, but what it needed was high shear strength. It has very, very low peel strength. The shear strength is when you're putting pressure

against something you have that ability you know if you're looking at it in this direction it won't move but the little flap on it has no peel strength to it very little and so when you put negative pressure on something on this side it flaps up very very easily

David Baker (26:51.919)
So that's it that's what we're gonna go into first because the the report really talks about that the the structure of flexible duck duct systems really isn't designed for negative air pressure. It's because of the flaps, predominantly because of the flaps are are one direction. I I described it as like petting a cat from the tail to the head, something like that. Is that similar to the concept or

John Miles (27:10.36)
Yeah, it would be, yes, that'd be a good concept.

David Baker (27:13.881)
For for us for us, you know, neophytes.

John Miles (27:15.863)
You

David Baker (27:18.723)
Is that the primary issue then, the flaps? Is that the st main structural problem with the the way that flex ducting does isn't compatible with negative air duct cleaning?

John Miles (27:28.474)
Well, it's because of the difference in the strengths. The sheer strength on it can withstand 20 times the amount of pressure put against that. And this is all in the specs from the flexible duct manufacturers and has what, 10 % of the same amount under the vacuum. So that alone should tell you the, you know, what...

which you should always should be doing positive pressure if you're going to be cleaning these particular ducts. Keep them what they were manufactured to do and not move it into a different direction where the adhesives or the structure alone, the wire structure can withstand that negative pressure.

David Hart (28:13.641)
I'd like to quickly clarify, if I may, the difference between shear strength and peel strength. And this is this is how I understand it, John. Of course, you're the expert, so you know, jump in anytime. But when you have two surfaces that are adhesed together, the shear strength is is the s the slide coefficient, shall I say.

John Miles (28:37.83)
Yes.

David Hart (28:38.484)
the peel strength is if you were to pull them straight across. For example, I think that's one of the things that makes a post-it work so well is the low peel strength and the high shear strength. And it the way you explained it to me, the way I understood it was you can't have both. If you're gonna have a lot of shear strength, you're gonna sacrifice peel strength and vice versa. And when you div when you designed the adhesive with which flex ducting is made, you went all out on shear strength. Because it's a called a forced air duct system for a reason. It's meant to have, if you look at a tube, okay,

John Miles (28:40.975)
that is.

David Hart (29:08.176)
Of ducting, it's meant to have air force into it, so you're gonna get pressure this way as it expands due to that positive pressure. You put negative, you put it under negative pressure, pull the air out from the inside, you're gonna get it pulling this way. And because flex ducting is two layers of of poly sheeting that are glued together with a metal coil down the middle for support, when you put pressure from the inside, negative pressure, you're pulling that inner layer.

of of plastic apart from the outer layer and it doesn't take much. Like you said, 20 times the the positive pressure it can handle. Negative pressure tolerance is between one half inch to one inch negative stratic pressure. That's water column. Okay. One half to one inch, the the positive pressure is ten inch. So it can handle literally 10 to 20 times the amount of positive pressure. So would would you concur with that, John?

John Miles (29:57.233)
That's exactly it. And the reason is that everyone knows that through these ducts, they absorb a huge amount of oil deposits from fragments of the skin, all the things that's going in there. And that oil, when it comes in contact with the polymer, if it is a very tactful polymer that has high peel strength, it will soften it too much. So the shear strength properties

David Hart (30:11.324)
Mm.

John Miles (30:27.15)
is with a polymer that has great shear strength, okay, and has resistance to that oil. So it's two-fold why the adhesive was developed the way it was. It was so that it would not, over time, the oil deposits and the dirt and debris in there would not lose the performance of that adhesive, but then also maintain that high shear strength. If you went to a more softer polymer, straight acrylic or something like that, yes, it would have incredible peel strength and have good resistance

But then it would have no resistance. The oil itself would absorb into that and it would get very mushy and it would lose all that performance. People see that when you have different, or not a post-it note, but real high-tech things. What do you do to get that label off the good, you put a little bit of oil and it gets really mushy and it comes off. That's exactly what would have happened in the flexible duct had you used an acrylic-based polymer for that.

David Hart (31:27.912)
Sounds you put a little bit of thought into this.

David Baker (31:27.919)
So

So clearly the you know, th these are not designed for negative air pressure. They're designed for positive air pressure, positive airflow, maybe some negative air pressure, but not a lot. What are the

David Hart (31:43.08)
The amount of negative pressure that would be generated by the return portion of the HVAC system, which you like again is not very much. So

David Baker (31:50.667)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And what we say it did we talk about what negative air pressure is? I didn't know if he defined it. Does everybody know what like it's it's what is negative air pressure? What is negative air duct cleaning?

David Hart (32:00.83)
John, you're the you're the you're the scient you're the scientist.

John Miles (32:01.253)
But that is just pulling a vacuum, just sucking in, know, kind of just like your regular vacuum that you have at your house. And you're literally putting it in an environment and sucking that debris. But the walls of that will pull in at the force of what's coming from the vacuum. So that's the whole concept of that.

David Baker (32:21.497)
Yeah. Yeah. And then negate and then neg that's good. Negative pressure sucks. And it sucks backwards, right? It's the different flow. Positive is through the through positively from where from the from the system. Yeah. And then yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So so it's not designed for neg strong and negative air pressure. What what are the consequences? Talk about that. Like cause your report identifies some of the damage and some of the

David Hart (32:23.73)
Negative pressure sucks.

David Hart (32:38.782)
Versus

David Baker (32:51.099)
ways that negative heavy n negative air pressure can impact the structure and what are the consequences?

David Hart (32:59.622)
Once again, John, I I can't compete with your articulation, so please, if you would.

John Miles (33:02.581)
Yeah.

Well, naturally, that cross slap we were talking about, once it pulls from that, now you've got, it's not gonna re-adh- there's no re-adhesion of these types of polymers. So once that flap opens, then you're gonna have unconditioned air to be able to migrate in there. Also, the wire that's on there, if it deforms, there's nothing to push it back out. So the, and so now you've got a deformed, flexible duct. So that's,

you know, those are two major areas that you're gonna get. And naturally once that deforms or that flap is opened up, when you do the mechanical sweeping or something in there, it's gonna grab a hold of that little piece and rip it even further. And then...

David Hart (33:49.172)
So the more it rips, the more the it's like a snowball effect. It sounds like. Yeah.

John Miles (33:53.07)
yeah. Yeah, well, once it comes undone, like I say, it's not going to open up. Now for...

you know, if you ran a camera back down there and you said had positive back on it, it may lay up against it. Okay, when you're looking at it and don't see anything, but once it relaxes, that flaps going to come down, that unconditioned air is going to come back in and then you're going to turn the unit on and it may go back up, but you just keep sit. mean, it's fooling you thinking it's repaired and it's not. And once unconditioned gets in there, we all know that a cold glass in the South is going to make condensation. That is a

David Hart (34:20.116)
Mm.

John Miles (34:29.829)
environment, spores and mold and all the different debris that's in an attic or in a crawl space where these ducts are, all that air is going to now be entrapped, going to grow mold, going to grow contaminants. And what are you doing? Just forcing that through your whole house. You you just did create one problem. You just pushed it in all the different rooms.

David Hart (34:46.462)
Yeah, John wrote

David Baker (34:48.495)
Yeah.

David Hart (34:51.09)
One thing I'd like to ask you, John, because when you transitioned, and by the way, I'm from Oregon, so we got to be careful with that word transitioned, but when you transitioned from flex duct manufacturing to the design of mold decontamination chemistry, did you say that you've noticed how much mold is growing in HVAC systems after having been subjected to negative air duct cleaning? Did I hear that correctly?

John Miles (35:17.092)
yeah, mean, people that get their duck cleaned and then...

we see it a good bit that they have more issues and then we come to find out their damage from the negative error. So that's honestly in my business in offering a chemistry that neutralizes the organics and detoxes these systems from the microtoxins that could be produced from the molds. What we recognize is that by partnering with somebody like David in the recommendation,

is using POSIT that they don't initially, those homeowners that are having issues with their home, they don't create another problem behind it. So you use the right proper technique of cleaning the ducts, then you decontaminate the duct with our chemistry, the building cleaner, and then put a protectant with the Endurance Coating Pro in that. And then those particular customers don't have those issues, at least in the lungs of the home. This is what you're breathing and what you're circulating throughout the home.

David Hart (36:23.71)
The lungs of the home, that's a really good analogy. I use that one myself. Yeah.

David Baker (36:29.283)
What but the structure is still compromised. Even even now it's clean and it's good, it needs to be clean, but you're still compromised from the negative air deck pressure that you had.

John Miles (36:38.438)
That is crap.

David Hart (36:39.343)
If you cleaned it with negative air. Now I think that John was suggesting that you do clean it, but you use positive pressure in the process. Yeah.

David Baker (36:44.613)
Gotcha, fair, fair, fair. Right. Yeah. Right. So talk about w you may have this on your home. You may get cleaning, but you don't like I my ducks are fine, I've had it cleaned, they look great. But the problem is you can't really see or detect whether or not your your ducks are compromised.

David Hart (37:03.869)
Somebody who has lung cancer looks great. You know, you can't see it, doesn't mean the problem's not there. there's typically a layer of insulation around flex ducting. you can't see the damage that's been done. John, concur?

John Miles (37:20.783)
That's exactly right. The only way you'd be able to see it is with some type of video through the actual duck. But the internal portion of that duck has been compromised now. And now you've put it in an environment that it wasn't meant to be in if unconditioned air is getting into that environment. And so that's the big problem.

David Hart (37:46.813)
You know, e even even a camera down there, I don't believe would also would always show the damage. In fact, if you look at the images that were supplied by the laboratory that provided the results for this research paper that did we did, which by the way, this laboratory, we went all out, okay. Shot for the stars on this one, you know, and that's the way I've always liked to do things, it's just shoot for the almost ridiculous. Okay. Then if you come up short, you're still pretty, pretty awesome, right?

So I reached out to what I can found to be the ultimate laboratory to do this testing. In fact, they actually do testing for Military Department of Defense and NASA, things like this. And they actually took on the project for us, which I thought was really, really cool. And they have some images in the report that they supplied for us that it show a enlarged view of the delamination, which you might not see with a naked eye or a camera or something of that nature.

David Baker (38:43.915)
You had talked about okay, so you do negative air duct cleaning, it can be real problematic. well, there's different ways you can mitigate against it. If I'm if I use negative air duct cleaning, well, you not really, but technically there are things you can do to help address it. Talk about that and why those are are not really doable.

David Hart (38:54.555)
Mm.

David Hart (38:59.303)
Yeah.

David Hart (39:05.299)
There are things that you can do. I mean, nobody in the right mind ever would. And here's what they are. Okay. Because first of all, if you're going to clean an HVAC system and you want to use negative error, you need to decipher whether or not there is any flex duct within that network of ducting of that structure. Okay. And that's going to be more than just asking somebody or even looking at the blueprints, because there may have been some remodeling done to some of that. Maybe a piece was re what was was replaced at some point.

Otherwise completely metal, but now there's a flex duct section in there. So it's going to take eyes on throughout that whole system. So first step, decipher whether or not there's any flex duct in it. That means getting eyes on every foot of ducting within that structure. Who's going to do that? That's ridiculous. Okay. It would take forever and all that. But let's say you do. Okay, well, now you need to decipher whether or not that flex ducting has a one-half inch or a one-inch.

Negative pressure tolerance, because those are the two different tolerances that that are out there by manufacturers. that's going to require you to find out the make and model of that ducting, find out which pressure tolerance it is. Who's going to do that? How could you do that? So, because you can't or won't, you need to just assume that it's the weaker of the two, one half-inch flex negative pressure. So

After crawling through the entire structure to decipher whether or not there's any flex ducting, then deciphering whether it's one half inch or one inch negative static pressure, and then assuming that it's half inch, now you need to set up pressure monitoring devices throughout that flex duct in order to ensure that you don't surpass those tolerances, which you're going to. Okay, I've I've talked with so many negative, negative former negative pressure people.

That have just been straight up honest with me. And one one individual even was one of the top NADCA National Air Duck Cleaning Association's instructors. He was with them for 30 years. he was actually an international liaison for for that organization. And he said, Look, he said, when we hook up negative air pressure equipment to a duct system, we we we hook it up until we get that flex duct just shaking, and then we back it off a hair. Now, if it's shaking.

John Miles (41:24.962)
Yeah

David Hart (41:27.213)
What kind of what kind of pressures have we got there? All right. He said that we create such negative pressures, we have actually flattened metal ducting before. Now, if you're flattening metal ducting, tell me that, tell me you're not surpassing one inch negative static pressure. So back to back to the process though. Deciphering if there's any flex duct, deciphering what the tolerance is, setting up monitoring equipment and monitoring it constantly during that negative pressure. Nobody's in their right mind, even you know, nobody even

out of their right mind would do that. It's it's it's insane. It's asinine. Okay. And the whole thing was even brought up just to show the asinineness of it. So you could do all that or just do what you should do. And that is use positive pressure and and get the job done, get the job done right.

David Baker (42:13.925)
Did you in the in the paper did you test positive and near air duct cleaning, or is it all just focused on the implications and the effects of negative air duct cleaning?

David Hart (42:23.207)
The the paper focuses on on the negative pressures. We didn't go heavy into the positive because the positive pressure tolerance is so high. It's like like like like John said, it's it's ten to twenty times the amount that you're never gonna you're never you're gonna come close to that.

David Baker (42:39.727)
Well, we know that because it's using the HVAC system to do the positive air duct cleaning. So the the the actual pr air pressure that the system was designed for is what's being used to clean the ducts. Is that fair to say? Yeah.

David Hart (42:51.442)
Correct. Yeah. We're utilizing the air handler, air movement in the process, which by the way has has other awesome attributes. For example, when I teach our courses here, we teach, you know, training and certification courses in positive air declining here in Bend, Oregon. we have a lot of people that transition from negative air declining to positive. And a lot of them will say, you know, I get tired of getting things stuck on the dampers.

Okay, now this is whole nother topic, and I don't want to go heavy into it right now, but but you know, any when you have a multi-zone system, you typically have trunk line and then you have branches that come off of that. And at that branch to trunk intersection, there'll be a damper. It's a flap that opens and closes to allow or disallow airflow into certain sections of the structure. Now, when they build a structure like a home, there's almost always construction garbage that gets done in there, chunks of wood, chunks of sheetrock, lunch wrappers.

I mean, tools. I've pulled every I pulled seven bricks out of a duct one time. People stuck them down in there in order to divert airflow. I pulled 24 pieces of silverware out of another another duct system one time, and it was the good, expensive silverware. It was in a hundred year old home. We figured that back in the depression, we know that a lot of people would hide their valuables in ducts. How do we know that? Because for 28 years, I've pulled valuables out of ducts of homes that are pre 1930.

John Miles (44:14.066)
You

David Hart (44:16.965)
Okay. So all these things are always in the branch. They're not in the trunk line. They're in the branch. And when you're doing negative error, you're pulling in reverse of the direction that was intended by the engineering of the HVAC system. And all that big stuff, those chunks of wood, chunks of sheetrock, and everything I just named, have to go past that damper, they get stuck on that damper, or worse yet, damage that damper. And now you've just made the whole situation worse. So, you know, there's there's more than more than just this pressure reason to get away from from negative error methodology.

David Baker (44:46.829)
In I I want to talk about one more thing about positive air duct cleaning and then move on to the industry standards. Positive air duct cleaning, you have your Santa jet and it it's a ball and it sprays out formula to disinfect or disinfectants inside. That's the super stratum, right? That's what we're talking about, right? Along with the Santa jet.

David Hart (45:07.684)
It's whatever decontaminant you want to apply for whatever reason. there's there's times and places in in order to apply a decontaminant. And once again, I use that word rather than disinfectant because let's say we're doing meth or fentanyl decontamination, you're not disinfecting it. There's no pathogens to kill. You're chemically neutralizing it. So in order to combine disinfectant with chemical neutralizer, I simply use the word decontaminant. But in order to get that into a duct system, the traditional way.

was to fog it. We've all heard of fogging a duct system. I'm gonna fog the ducts. And the way that's done is to take a fogging machine, put your chemical in there, and then blast it into the return duct with the air handler running and it carries it through the duct system. And at surface value, that sounds like it makes sense. It does carry it through the duct system. But then again, let's examine that preposition through as opposed to onto okay. It carries it through the duct system. And I've done this, okay, because I've been in this industry for over 30 years.

And SantaJet's only been around for 15. So I did the same thing everybody else is doing, which is to fog it. And you blow it in through the return and you watch the supplies until that fog starts to come out of the supply ducts and you can see it entering the room and you shut your fogger off. That's what everybody does. But golden rule from apply for applying a disinfectant is there's two golden rules: coat the surface completely and allow dwell time, right? Well, if you're not going to coat the surface completely, you're not going to achieve what that decontaminant is supposed to do.

The only way you will really have coded all that ducting is if you continue to fog and you're watching all that fog come out of the return or the supply ducts, and you fill that structure so full of fog that you will have coated the tabletops, the windows, the wall, the ceiling, the you will have coded the interior structure and contents to the point of just absurdity. And nobody does that. Nobody would. And so therefore, fogging a duct system doesn't work. It can't work.

So we came up with Santa jet, which is a compressed air canister that has a long hose, and on the end of that hose is the ball to which you referred that has 13 holes, has six holes 45 degree angle backward, six holes 45 degree angle forward. And by the way, they're they're staggered for a starburst effect. And we have one at the very tip that shoots it straight forward. We run that down into the duct, depress the lever.

David Hart (47:27.394)
It it mists the the decontaminant along the side of the duct and you slowly retract that through the duct with the HVAC handler turned off so that there's no airflow, nothing blows into the structure. You're putting a hundred percent that you could decontaminate exactly where you want it to be, zero percent where you don't, and it gives you a hundred percent control over how much you put in there. And yes, super stratum is what we use for mold. And I tell you what, ever since we switched, you know, because I've been doing this forever. Superstrat, how long you been?

David Baker (47:47.429)
So the answer is yes.

David Baker (47:53.253)
That's long yes. That was the longest yes I've ever seen in my life.

David Hart (47:56.624)
You warned him. You warned us. Yeah. man, I get on the phone with people. I'm like

David Baker (48:00.229)
Do you super strand up? Well, let me tell ya.

John Miles (48:02.034)
Well, you use super stratum for the decontaminants. Remember, we got to focus on that. As a disinfectant, it's not the chemistry is focused around the organics that are left in that environment. Now there are some properties that that chemistry has that could be that, but the EP regulates that language on that. So we're focused around the organics and the removal of those things. And you're using the right amount.

David Hart (48:04.068)
Okay. Okay.

David Baker (48:11.589)
Sorry.

John Miles (48:31.538)
Because also when you're following something at the beginning, you're saturating a whole lot of there before even a little bit just comes out the end. And so you're wasting a lot of chemicals and you're putting much more stress on all those adhesives again because you've got this water saturant that is just dripping in there. And it's just not, it's not a good practice to have that much water, you know, in your HVAC system. It will take a little time for it to dry out when you follow like that.

David Baker (49:01.251)
And the so the point is that positive air duct cleaning works quite well hand in glove with super stratum solutions, and it should be the way it should air duct HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. But let's talk about the industry now. Like what what's going on with the industry? What standard where does it I don't think the industry really differentiates between negative air duct cleaning and positive air duct cleaning? They don't really have a voice on that. What what's happening there and where should things go? What should happen next until

For the industry to how should the industry react?

David Hart (49:31.857)
You know, a lot of industries are slow to evolve. you can have new methodology that is superior, and it will take forever for the industry to really adopt it. I will say that positive air dye cleaning, the it is very, very widely used. In fact, I've personally trained people in several countries. We have come, we just had a group from Bermuda actually come and get trained and certified by us.

so there are users of positive air diet cleaning in every major city, the United States and twenty-four foreign countries. Bermuda was our twenty fourth. so yeah, it's it's very widely used, but but still

The traditional method still dominates the industry.

David Baker (50:18.117)
But the industry does the industry say anything about negative versus positive air?

David Hart (50:27.05)
No, the industry hasn't addressed it. And I think that's a couple of reasons. I think that the positive air duct cleaning methodology is new enough that it hasn't gotten into the conversation enough yet. And, you know, getting people to change something, people don't like change. Especially old organizations that have been around forever and they make money by the methodology they've been preaching for years, to to sit there and say,

You know what? That doesn't work anymore. You get they're not gonna be real big on jumping.

David Baker (50:59.853)
We don't need it to we don't by the way, we don't we in the interview we'll cut that part 'cause we don't need to to throw any shade at the industries, right? I don't think you want to. Yeah. I'm just I'm just knowing what you said about IR C R C so.

David Hart (51:06.105)
Okay. No, you're right.

John Miles (51:08.019)
I don't.

don't know if you're throwing shade, but honestly, think part of it is because I think they're a little embarrassed, honestly, because David pointed this out and none of them recognized that the adhesive and the structural design has all been written for the last 40 some years with flexible duct that one is much stronger than the other, but no one took notice of that. And for that, I think is the biggest problem.

where I think they're basically, don't know how to move forward because if they acknowledge they made a mistake, then they've got 40 years of having to deal with people coming back with that, that's the reason why I'm sick in my home and these other things. I don't know what the industry, I think we're doing the right thing by bringing it up and we'll see how they react, but it's gonna be curious.

David Baker (52:06.671)
We're following the science, right, David? I know you like that, David. We're following the science. What does the data say?

David Hart (52:07.195)
You know, it kind of reminds I love following the science. It kind of reminds me of and I shouldn't say reminds me because I wasn't around back then, but when doctors used to medical doctors used to promote cigarette smoking as a healthy thing to do. And then it's like, guess what? You know, it's not. you know, it like like John said, it's embarrassing to to to the industry that has supported that for so long.

David Baker (52:35.481)
Anyway, well thank you both for for talking through this report and it's really exciting. This is as we said, a seismic shift in the industry and we're looking forward to hearing more. any final thoughts?

David Hart (52:50.213)
No final thoughts. No, please cut that. Please don't put that in there.

John Miles (52:52.019)
you

David Baker (52:56.079)
I'm gonna put that at the front, at the beginning. You have the intro? No thoughts. No thoughts. No final cut the final. No thoughts.

John Miles (52:58.471)
No thoughts.

David Hart (53:00.559)
Right. Like like they did with like with Bill Clinton, I don't have the answers. Yeah.

David Baker (53:06.883)
I don't have the answers, right. Okay, well let's do a little goodbye then. Okay, well thank both. Thank you, John, for for joining this conversation. Thank you, David, for this great report. We're looking forward to see great things from this new study.

John Miles (53:07.315)
You

David Hart (53:20.677)
Sounds great, thank you. And by the way, if you want to do that again and do your seismic shift, I think that was beautiful. By the way, seismic shift is fucking cool.

John Miles (53:22.237)
Save here.

David Baker (53:30.629)
Seismic shift. I know I keep using that one. That's a good one. What did I say? I can't remember. I I I think I think I said it okay the first time. I'll we'll use that one.

David Hart (53:33.155)
I like it, dude.

David Hart (53:40.709)
Yeah, but then I f'd it up. But anywho.

David Baker (53:44.665)
Well, let me do one more take just in case. well thank you both for for joining joining this discussion of this report. It's gonna be a seismic shift in the industry. It's really, really exciting. John, thank you for for joining this call. And David, congratulations on this new report. We're looking forward to seeing great things.

David Hart (53:47.131)
Cool. Seism.

David Hart (54:01.371)
Thank you, David. Thank you, John.

John Miles (54:01.555)
Thank you.

David Baker (54:07.109)
That's it. All right. Thank you. Anything are we we okay? D did that go okay? I thought we had covered a lot of good stuff.

John Miles (54:10.735)
I think so.

David Hart (54:15.247)
And and we have a couple for the blooper reel too, so that's good.

David Baker (54:17.693)
Yeah, we got a we got a lot of bloopers. We have a a whole you know section of bloopers over the last number of s episodes we've done. We should, yeah. I've been I've I've been holding I haven't really thought through how we're gonna do it yet. But yeah, we should. Yeah.

John Miles (54:18.035)
you

David Hart (54:23.727)
Are you gonna do a blooper reel? 'cause I think you should. I think it'd be awesome.

David Hart (54:29.659)
But anyway, on a serious note, seriously, John, that was freaking I d I mean, by far, and no, I don't tell everybody this, our best guest, man. I mean, hands down.

David Baker (54:37.815)
I would say so. Yeah. think Second was Clay, but you're best. you're number one so far.

John Miles (54:42.814)
Well, thank you. One out of two.

David Hart (54:43.792)
Perfect.

David Baker (54:44.973)
I'm not don't no no dis to Bob Jordan though. Don't tell Bob He's really hard to edit. He's really hard to edit it. God bless him. We love him, but Bob Jordan, he's great. He's great. But he's yeah, Bob, yeah.

David Hart (54:48.942)
Right. He actually rambles more than I do, man. Doesn't he? gee.

John Miles (54:55.902)
Who's that? Who's that? Gleg? Or are we all fucked?

David Hart (54:59.044)
Bob Jordan. clay is a fucking mechanism. Yeah. Yeah.

John Miles (55:02.868)
Have a

David Baker (55:03.095)
yeah, I did nothing. He's so crystal clear in his thinking. So okay. Well

David Hart (55:08.432)
Mm-hmm.

John Miles (55:09.298)
No, I'm excited to see. I think this is going to accelerate for all of us very quickly for a lot of opportunities because.

you know it's like that light bulb moment and no one's gone to flip the light on and once that light comes on no one else can hide you can't hide even from a little bit of light in the in the darkness and that's where naturally these flexible duct has been in the dark for a while and this is going to be a way to to

David Hart (55:40.496)
That was great. I wish we were recording right now.

David Baker (55:42.297)
We are. Can I use that?

John Miles (55:43.828)
Ultimately. yeah. Yeah. It's that's that's good. Yeah. Well, the biggest, the biggest things that we have with Superstratum Labs and is it's what I try to get customers. Yeah. The, the homeless is a toxic environment. They know they're sick. We got to fix that. But I really want those customers to

David Baker (55:45.957)
Am I okay to use that? That's a good one. okay, good. Yeah.

David Hart (55:49.956)
You'd be like like Jep Jump Hey, if I said it you can use it, okay, okay.

David Baker (55:53.721)
Yeah.

John Miles (56:11.046)
first clean their HVAC systems before they do the rest of the house because if you spend that money and do all that and then don't change the other, I don't know what, I know there's same toxins are in there and then you just release them back out into a clean environment. It makes no sense. And so that's why it's so important. Needs.

David Hart (56:28.697)
And I exactly to do it first. Like when Jeff Jones asked me to write the standards for Microbi Warrior, we came into this very room right here to write. I mean, we came in here for two months, eight hours a day straight and came down to brass, you know, let's figure this out. We decided that it had to be done first in the process of of restoration project. We tried to see, well, how will it work if we do it midway or at the end? And it just didn't line up. First and then seal it off is the way to go. Yeah. Or with your coding, John.

John Miles (56:55.868)
Yeah, even... well, even...

David Hart (56:58.596)
With your coding, I think you could even not seal it and it's fine, right?

John Miles (57:01.448)
Well, yeah, mean, the coating is going to ensure you even if contaminants get down there or anything, they're not going to grow on that surface, you know, after that. through and that's the biggest key, you know.

David Hart (57:17.164)
Ever ever since we've implemented this the superstratum products into our mold decontamination processes, which we have done a ton of. Okay. I've been to Hawaii five times in the last year to do mold, three times to redo mold of HVAC that was done improperly. Ever since we've implemented the superstratum products, we have not failed a test. Yeah. Beautiful. Love it.

John Miles (57:37.106)
Yeah, and I don't know, this is one thing, because this is going to be out there, we talked about in there, you said disinfected. You got to be very careful around my product. And you probably noticed me backtrack on that. Yes, Artemis can talk about being a disinfectant or that, but they can't talk about being a cleaner. Yeah.

David Baker (57:48.419)
Yeah, I understand. Right. I no, I know. I I we did the same thing with Artemis. Yeah. Yeah. You

David Hart (57:52.585)
Oxidizer.

David Baker (57:58.671)
But not disinfecting, I know. EPA regulations, I know, yeah.

David Hart (58:02.128)
Do we call it an oxidizer or what, John?

John Miles (58:03.794)
No, yes, that's exactly what it's an oxidizer. You actually, a decontaminant, you know, getting rid of the contaminant, removing. And so, yes, it's an organic oxidizer to reduce those chemical structures down to where just, you know, they are not harmful anymore as a toxin, where it can pass the brain barrier to our DNA that causes those sicknesses. That's what these chemistries, the HOCl as well as our chlorine dioxide,

David Hart (58:10.298)
Covers everything. Yeah.

John Miles (58:33.702)
we didn't really talk about, know, but those do that. And then the protectant is a protectant that keeps mold from ever growing on the surface of that coating. And since David's equipment ideally sprays all the way through very evenly, now that whole core or rigid vent is covered with this protectant so that when that if a mold, which mold is going to get back into the house and pass through the system when they land on that surface,

with all the other debris of dust and dirt, it will not grow on that surface, even if condensation somehow gets in there. Even at the first parts of returns, because you typically only have, if a proper duct is done right, you only have condensation in the first five feet of a return, because then the dehumidification happens through the duct. And then when the pressure comes back, the cold air starts to come back out into the room, you only have an option

Opportunity to create condensation in that first five to eight feet Otherwise, but we all know when the flexible doesn't get some unconditioned, know, it could happen in the middle But that's ideally but by having the protected in all those areas that when that sport when the Systems off and the spore kind of flies in there and lands It's not going to grow on those surfaces and that's what everybody wants especially in like I always use this analogy because everybody can relate when we were in

college now different to my college. What do we all do is guys we would turn the AC all the way down in our room and open up the window to yell at the girls outside, but we would grow mold all around the HVAC vents and all around our window seats. And I tell every parent to use my products in those two places when they go into their new dorms and they won't and the parents want they will not have mold problems because about three months in those kids that are a students all of sudden don't know how

David Hart (01:00:17.968)
Mm-hmm.

David Hart (01:00:28.696)
А military basis.

John Miles (01:00:33.328)
to study in their own room and that's why they go to the library and they go to the different places because it's impossible with all those that molds already started forming they don't think of it molds growing up there nobody thinks that but that is the reasons why they can't study in their rooms

David Hart (01:00:48.471)
Military bases is another one that has a big mold issue.

John Miles (01:00:50.49)
are huge.

David Baker (01:00:52.143)
I've seen p I've seen pictures, it's just awful. They deserve better.

John Miles (01:00:53.107)
Yes, it's it's it's a shameful and you know there's a lot of reasons that because most of the housing was done before air condition was developed. So we retrofitted and put like a lean tube on side of these homes and think they were yeah and just made a toxic environment out of them to the soldiers and the families of our soldiers and just literally make a second. No one knows. We've I've been a basis and try to show them how to do that, but.

David Baker (01:01:14.693)
That should not happen.

John Miles (01:01:21.557)
It's hard to get them to listen. I do like the fact that the Change the Area Foundation has got some now amendments in place and different states are now reacting and that they can get this done right. I would love them to be using the endurance coating because once they clean it up and they put that on there, they don't have to worry about it anymore. That becomes the simplicity of the endurance coating.

David Baker (01:01:45.989)
When you do the air sorry, just one more question. Like when you use the sana jet, is it a two time pass through? It's first the disinfectant and then and then the coating. Uh-huh.

David Hart (01:01:55.343)
Back only. Yeah. we we insert the hose as far as it'll go. and once again, if there is ducting beyond as far as that that ball goes, the hole on the end will blast it several feet forward. we actually have video of that on YouTube where you can see where you've we've taken clear ducting and and you can see just how far it goes. It's pretty phenomenal. as far as it'll go, then depress the lever and retract.

David Baker (01:02:19.523)
My question is this is it two different so do you have to do the first time for the decontaminant and then the second time for the coating? Is that what happens? Yeah.

John Miles (01:02:25.683)
building clear.

John Miles (01:02:30.419)
I assume, David, the first time you do with the building cleaner and the oxidizer and then you reinsert and put the endurance coating to protect it in and bring it back out. Is that correct?

David Hart (01:02:44.58)
That's what we've been doing. We've been doing the you call it the building building cleaner. we apply it as an oxidizer, of course. in this particular case of HVAC. We apply that, then we allow both dwell time and dry time, and then we apply the the the coating. Yeah.

David Baker (01:03:03.599)
That's great. Well, thank you guys. Appreciate it. Thank you, John. Yeah, a lot of a lot of content here. A lot of content to work with. So Yeah. All right, Jens.

John Miles (01:03:07.199)
Well, thank you.

David Hart (01:03:10.809)
Seismic shift, man.

John Miles (01:03:12.053)
I'm excited. Totally excited. This will fall perfect for us, David, when we go to the show. You need to send me a bill for my half of that.

David Hart (01:03:19.94)
Yes.

David Baker (01:03:25.029)
What for the fall? for when are you out there, John? Are you out at at the experience in the fall?

David Hart (01:03:25.645)
Right, right, right.

John Miles (01:03:30.825)
Yeah, we're gonna share a booth there. Well, I'm gonna help him in this. And then we'll just be able to market our products through him.

David Baker (01:03:37.935)
That's great. That's great. That's terrific.

David Hart (01:03:38.339)
We're gonna promote both, yeah. And he and I are gonna we're gonna both present together at a one of those at a presentation. So yeah. And both of us are so short winded, I don't know if we can fill the forty five minutes, you know.

David Baker (01:03:48.803)
Make sure Andrew gets that. Capture that. Yeah.

I don't know. You'll find a way. You'll find some way. Your introductions alone will go forty five minutes.

John Miles (01:03:55.827)
Hehehehehe

David Hart (01:03:56.847)
Right.

Yeah.

David Baker (01:04:03.429)
All right, guys. All right, thanks guys so much. Nice to meet you, John. All right, bye, bye guys.

David Hart (01:04:03.575)
I'm so and so here's all K. Thank you. Have a nice day.

John Miles (01:04:05.289)
Yep.

Alright, we'll see you guys.

David Hart (01:04:11.161)
Thank you guys both.

Okay, I need to

