David Baker (00:01)
Welcome to Straight From the Heart because HVAC cleaning should be a positive experience. I'm here with David Hart and David, founder of Ram Air. David, what are you reading and where are you?

Hahaha! ⁓

David Hart (00:16)
⁓ hey, what's up?

Yeah, sorry. I'm just so engrossed. This is great reading. I'm actually reading a book called The Mitigation Handbook written by a friend of mine named Bob Jordan, ⁓ who's actually going to be our guest today. ⁓ He's a former, yeah, he's a former aerospace engineer. Brilliant guy. Also one of the best hearts of anybody I know. ⁓ I just absolutely love the guy. And he

David Baker (00:32)
Fantastic.

David Hart (00:44)
purchased a Purell Clean franchise and is now running that out of Seattle, Washington. And he has been kicking butt with the HVAC cleaning, adding that to his restoration process. So yeah, he's going in on us today.

David Baker (00:59)
fantastic. Well, let's get right to it. Bob, how you doing, sir?

Bob Jordan, PE (01:03)
I'm doing well. a little sunny here in so good to see you David again and David and David.

David Hart (01:05)
Hey Bob.

David Baker (01:10)
think David has a better backdrop than

either of us.

Bob Jordan, PE (01:14)
I think he does too. I'm in an office and it looks like he's with the palm tree behind him directly. Can't get any better than that. Yeah, I know it. Pretty good.

David Baker (01:19)
I'm in a cabin.

David Hart (01:21)
It's not a green screen. It's the real deal. Yeah.

David Baker (01:23)
It's real, I know, you don't know anymore. It's true.

Bob, tell us

about the book. We just saw that book. What's that about?

Bob Jordan, PE (01:34)
just speaking about it. It's a book called the ⁓ Mitigation Handbook and there's a website that goes with it, themitigationhandbook.com. And the intention when I first wrote it, it's been out for a year. It was intended for the new Restoration franchise owner who maybe he's being taught things like QuickBooks and sales and marketing and

administration and licensing and all of these things, but the gap is that they're not being taught how to do the actual field work. And a part of my book includes

I've got the normal water, fire, mold, biohazard, odor, commercial large loss. But we also have a chapter on duct cleaning. And my intention is to update the book every two years. as, as we improve and learn, then we put out a new version because things in our industry can change. Chemistry can change processes, equipment. And that was the first. Yeah.

David Baker (02:31)
Okay.

David Hart (02:46)
and they should change.

Bob Jordan, PE (02:48)
That was the purpose of the book was to help the new owner, whoever he is. Now I own a Pure Clean franchise, as you said, we are in our 10th year, but this is for anybody. This is for any restoration franchise, any independent, anybody who wants to get a leg up. And frankly, it's the book that I wish I had when I started, because I didn't know how to do this stuff. David mentioned that I came out of the corporate world and

David Baker (03:12)
night.

Bob Jordan, PE (03:17)
Sure, I I had accomplishments and knew some things, but this is specific information. You just don't, you know, it isn't intuitive. You've got to know where to get the stuff. So that was the purpose behind the

David Baker (03:27)
great.

Well,

speaking of getting stuff, where do you get that stuff? Where do you get the book? Where can you find it? In the book store. Okay, great.

Bob Jordan, PE (03:36)
⁓ any of the booksellers. Yeah, Barnes & Noble, Yeah, Ingram

Sparks. Any of the booksellers have it.

David Hart (03:44)
I got mine on an- well, I got a personally signed copy. Okay.

David Baker (03:44)
Or you could go to...

David Hart (03:52)
Bids starting at $100,000, okay? At the end of the, well, there'll a link at the end of this podcast.

David Baker (03:53)
That's gorgeous.

Bob Jordan, PE (03:54)
Too

funny.

David Baker (03:59)
But you can also go to,

⁓ you can also go to themitigationhandbook.com, right? And you wanted to go by there as well. True?

Bob Jordan, PE (04:06)
Well, yeah, and it just has links to the other booksellers. I don't, yeah, yeah, I don't actually sell it out of

David Baker (04:10)
Okay, gotcha. Okay. Yeah,

you're not in the inventory business for books. Yeah, I gotcha. So let's talk about that. Now, there's a chapter on HVAC and duct cleaning. ⁓ When is that next chapter coming out? Is it two years out or one year out?

Bob Jordan, PE (04:17)
No, I'm-

Yeah, probably like another year out. So we've actually learned some things since the publication of the book. And David taught us, he and his team taught us how to do duct cleaning and they actually were, we're, we're both in the Pacific Northwest. He was able to pop up here. Ours, ours, our first job was a combination, illicit drugs and fire. So we had soot odor and we also had

David Baker (04:32)
Okay.

Bob Jordan, PE (04:59)
you know, drugs and David and his team were up here full PPE showed us how to do it. He was getting ready to leave and he was packing up the gear and I said, hold on, leave it with me. Don't take it back. I'll buy it on the spot. We want this equipment. We're going to do this too.

And we

We actually had a job scheduled today. I mean, we actually do ducks on a fairly regular basis now. And, you know, we charge $3,500 for what we do and up. It's all insurance approved if it's for that type of an application. Other applications are self-pay. But we feel that we do a great job with it. I mean, we get the...

debris out, get stuff out and we disinfect the ducts and we're very pleased with the system. We actually have two systems. We actually have the one and we were doing enough of it to where we wanted to have a second unit. And so we have two complete standalone units at our warehouse and we'll be using it again Monday. Like I said, it was actually supposed to be today.

David Baker (06:17)
What's that system? Is that...

that's the Santa Jet system? What do you call that dude? What's the whole package? Everything is the hard package?

David Hart (06:22)
It's the whole package.

Bob Jordan, PE (06:23)
Yeah, he's got a deluxe package. is

it called David? Is it the deluxe?

David Hart (06:27)
Well,

it's called we call it the platinum package, which is a combination of the duct cleaning as well as the Santa Jet disinfectant. It's the entire everything you need. Yeah.

Bob Jordan, PE (06:30)
flatten it.

Yep, everything you need and...

David Baker (06:37)
Got it. That $3,500

job, how long would that take you to do?

Bob Jordan, PE (06:42)
One day for us. So, so, so, so for us, it's like one day, two people for a house. David's team can do a house one guy in a half a day. So he's like four times. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He's like four times faster.

David Baker (06:44)
Okay, that's right. That's terrific.

Yeah, okay.

That's because he's a professional. Well, you're a professional too. Don't get it wrong.

Bob Jordan, PE (07:04)
He's four times

David Baker (07:04)
Yeah.

Bob Jordan, PE (07:05)
faster than us, but we're still capable and we make money at this. mean, an entire water job where you're going back two and three times, checking equipment, setting equipment, drying out. I you can do a, it just pays well. I've told people in my own franchise network that you'd be a fool to not have this. You can add it on now.

David does duct cleaning as a business. We actually don't necessarily advertise it. ⁓ We do it in conjunction with other jobs that we're doing. So we focus on the disinfecting side of duct cleaning as well.

David Baker (07:53)
Okay, gotcha.

David Hart (07:54)
Which I was actually, if

I can cut in real quick, I was gonna point out, it takes you a day because you're doing what we call forensic restoration, crime scene, unintended death, homicide, suicide, illicit drug, mold, and for those, yeah. Now when we, and we do that too. In fact, we just did a ⁓ meth slash fentanyl job last week. We do a ton of mold. In fact, that's why I'm on the islands right now is because I got called out from Oregon to the big island of Hawaii.

David Baker (07:57)
Absolutely.

Bob Jordan, PE (08:07)
Yeah.

David Hart (08:24)
so many times to do mold cleaning of HVAC, mold decontamination, I finally said screw it, I'm opening a branch out here. I don't mind being here anyway. But if you're just doing regular duct cleaning as a business for Sally, a homeowner that wants to get the dust and debris out of her ducts and it's not a disaster or forensic restoration situation, you can knock out, we figure a thousand square feet an hour for one person. So 2,000 square feet is gonna take one person two hours. So what you're doing, Bob,

is much more involved. You're going in full PPE, you're killing pathogens, you're neutralizing dangerous chemicals, things like that. So it's gonna take longer for what you're doing.

Bob Jordan, PE (08:55)
Yeah.

Yeah, okay, sure. And that's fair. ⁓ But we think we've gotten down pretty good. Go ahead.

David Baker (09:08)
Do you do any jobs

that are just ⁓ HVAC, if somebody wants just HVAC cleaning, or do you only do it when it's part of larger project?

Bob Jordan, PE (09:19)
Actually up into this point, everything we've done has been as a part of another assignment. Like David was talking about, blood bio, illicit drugs, mold fire, even the cigarette smoke odor. The one that we're doing now, and I don't even know how they found this, but they did. But it's a family that there was mold in the duct systems. So there's really

David Baker (09:26)
Yeah. Gotcha.

Bob Jordan, PE (09:46)
They don't need anything done in the home. They just need the ducks cleaned and disinfected. So we'll be doing our first stand alone. ⁓ yeah. And that's exactly what we use as the Santa jet. Absolutely. Are you kidding? Yeah. It's, it's, it's foolproof. It, it, you know, Dave and I were kind of going over some, ⁓ you know, ⁓ test and

David Baker (09:54)
a perfect example for Santa Jet, right?

Bob Jordan, PE (10:16)
The other method is where people will apply a fog to maybe the air handler side, and then the fog theoretically goes through the duct line and gets on the inside of the ducts and gets them clean. Now that's what the theory is. But in actuality, you're only wetting like

a foot or two into the system and the fog dissipates in order to get the fog to go all the way through. You're going to have to fumigate the house. And that's just, yeah. And that's just not reasonable. That's not practical. So people can claim that they're disinfecting ducks, but we, we actually do it. mean, you can see it in action. When we,

David Hart (10:58)
Yeah, saturated.

Bob Jordan, PE (11:15)
or at the tail end of it and you can still see some duct, you can see the amount that we're applying uniformly throughout. Yeah, the AsanaJet system is genius. works. You know, it just works and we enjoy it. We enjoy it a lot. You know, I'll tell you who's got the footage, RamAir.co. ⁓

David Baker (11:33)
You don't have any footage of that do you? Any footage of a project or working with the Ram Air system on site?

Bob Jordan, PE (11:45)
or go onto YouTube, ramair.co.duckcleaning and you'll see all the stuff. David's got a 17, 18 minute.

David Baker (11:45)
Yeah, well.

Well, I was asking if you had

something from a project that you were working on. I didn't know if you had before after photos or anything that showed up.

Bob Jordan, PE (11:58)
You know?

for everything else that I teach and train on. So I teach water, fire, mold, biohazard, ducks, fording, odor, and we have our own videos for that. But the videos that David produces are so good that I include his videos into my presentations because it's just so clear. just...

David Baker (12:10)
Yeah.

Bob Jordan, PE (12:29)
shows everything so well and people just are gasping.

David Baker (12:31)
I I just

learned that that one video of Santa Jet got 10 million views. Is that true? Your Santa Jet video?

David Hart (12:41)
I believe that one of ours, yes, did get that many. And it got it in like no time too. know, it's pretty incredible.

David Baker (12:49)
that's remarkable yeah we'll show we'll do some footage yeah we'll show it right here it'll be be well we'll show it again ⁓ so what's next for you Bob as you in terms of offering this service or even your own projects what's what's what's on the horizon here the rest of the year

Bob Jordan, PE (12:50)
Very incredible.

David Hart (12:55)
There it is.

Bob Jordan, PE (13:05)
Well, we will continue to do what we're doing, which is, you know, we do kind of cigarette smoke odor jobs. We were at a military base where they have fentanyl. Now, fentanyl is bad stuff. I mean, it's very bad stuff. We don't even walk into the house with that. We're fully PPE'd. We have the Max Air helmet system. We've got gloves. Our wrists are taped up.

where the glove and the suit interface, and we're completely gowned up. And we go in and we, you know, we will test if that's what they want us to do beforehand. If they haven't already tested, but they suspect, then we can test. Just a quick little sidebar, here in Washington state, there's a requirement by the Department of Health to be certified to do methamphetamine cleanup.

And there's a certification for the worker level and there's a certification for the supervisor level. We have four supervisors at my company, including me. We take this way serious and we have a bulletproof system for abatement in the living space. But we always, and I mean always do the duct system and the HVAC.

And David taught us how to do that, him and his team, Andrew and like others there, Cole down at his facility. And they taught us how to do this and they support us every step of the way. Now I can call Cole anytime, know, hey, you know, I need an extra of this or do you have that? know, by the time I get home, it's in the mail on the doorstep. mean, these guys move quick and just very

David Baker (15:00)
Yeah.

Bob Jordan, PE (15:04)
very sensitive. And what I enjoy a lot about working with David is that David is in the field too, when he needs to be just as I am. I want to know how things work. want to write procedures around them. In the mitigation handbook, we've got an app that goes with it. And it describes what you want to do when you're deploying for a job.

When you're doing duct work, make sure you've got everything with you and proper chemistry, proper equipment. And you know, it's, we don't do it every day. So it's easy to maybe forget to take something. So we just have an app and the guys use the app, whether they're, whatever they're deploying for things that we don't do every day. And ducks would be in that package. Yeah.

David Baker (15:59)
And you said it's easy. It's easy to

1, 2, 3. Just follow the steps and you're good to go.

Bob Jordan, PE (16:03)
Yeah, and just yeah,

make it easy, you know, and when we're in the field every now and then we would run into something that was, you know, special case or we had never seen this before. We just call into Ram Air, you know, and we get some advice. And and they stay on the phone with us and work us through it. And to this point, everything we've gone after, we've been we've been a successful at it.

David Baker (16:08)
Okay.

Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah.

That's great to hear. great to hear. ⁓ How would you say, just one final question. it's been helpful. Is there any way to quantify the kind of impact it's had on your business, either in the number of extra projects that you have done or in the profitability or if you don't have anything else, okay, but I'm just curious if there's something, if you could quantify the impact Ram Air Systems have had on your business.

Bob Jordan, PE (16:58)
Well, let me tell you what we have done that could be a help to the listener. So we do work with insurance as well too. Duct cleaning by a mitigation company like ours is not as common as it should be.

So we have contacted our insurance carriers, certainly the main ones, know, Allstate Liberty Travelers, and we have told them about our duct cleaning and disinfecting system and have gotten pre-approval to go ahead and do that as well because that's not as common. So we have got the table set.

for ourselves now. And there's codes in Xactimate, and I described those in the app. I describe it in the handbook. And, you know, the idea is to go out and make money at this stuff. And we, we actually were not doing ducks at all when we started. And we went a few years without doing ducks. These past

David Baker (17:56)
Yeah, that's great.

David Hart (18:13)
You know, real quick,

David Baker (18:13)
So

now, so if I understand correctly, then go ahead, go ahead David.

David Hart (18:16)
I would just

I was just gonna throw in real quick. You were talking about Xactimate. You and I actually worked together on adding two line items to Xactimate for duct decontamination. And you know now, and that's where the big bucks come in. On a forensic job like mold or any bio, we're talking 175 bucks a register, 1700 bucks for the air handler.

David Baker (18:31)
That's great.

David Hart (18:49)
You you got a small house with 10 registers off the top of my head. mean, I'm no mathematician, but I think that's about $3,500, isn't it? Somebody math real quick, but...

Bob Jordan, PE (18:58)
Usually that's

about what we're charging.

David Hart (19:01)
Yeah, and we're knocking that out in two hours. mean, so yeah, and you know, it's it's come duck cleaning, HVAC cleaning and decontamination has come light years in recent years. Just even the last year even, I mean, because I've been doing this for 30 years. I've had my company for 28. And I remember talking to people saying, duck cleaning, what's that? You know, and then 10 years ago, duck cleaning. Yeah, I think I heard of that. That sounds like good idea. Now. Oh my God.

David Baker (19:04)
Nice.

Bob Jordan, PE (19:04)
Well,

yeah, you are.

David Baker (19:08)
Okay.

Bob Jordan, PE (19:17)
So, I'm not sure if we're going to get out of this, I this is kind of fun.

David Hart (19:30)
We are so booked out. We're booked out for a month solid. I got applications for new employees coming in. I'm out in the field every day myself because we're so slammed. You know, I mean, it's just it's and it's not turned about. Jeff Jones, Jeff Jones from Microbial Warrior, the top forensic restoration operator literally in the world, said that he's never been argued with by an insurance company on including the HVAC on a biochop ever. They just don't. They don't. You know, it's part of the work.

Bob Jordan, PE (19:36)
Yeah.

Thank you.

Right, yeah.

David Hart (20:00)
It's the lungs of the building. I think the lungs are kind of an important part of the body. You know what I'm saying? Yeah.

David Baker (20:04)
So if you're a contractor or you're

Bob Jordan, PE (20:04)
They are.

David Baker (20:05)
in

a business, you're going to do these jobs anyway. This is just adding a couple more line items to a project that you're already working on. So it's just getting the equipment, getting the skills to do it, and just adding that to the project. That's brilliant.

Bob Jordan, PE (20:14)
Thank you.

Okay,

not only that, not only that, but when we're selling jobs, so we do work for insurance, but then we also do what's called self paid work. So say that I'm working with a real estate broker, she's got a house that she wants to sell. It's got cigarette smoke odor. Okay. She's checking with

different suppliers, know, contractors to find out how much it would cost to do a job like that. Well, we were trained by Jeff Jones again in the microbial warrior system that his biohazard systems work very well in non biohazard environments as well. Certainly, certainly the

David Hart (21:10)
Absolutely.

Bob Jordan, PE (21:13)
chemistry, the equipment, the processes. And we can use these on cigarette smoke odor jobs. And we talk to the brokers and tell them not only that, but we will do the ducks as well too. And everybody overlooks the ducks because nobody knows how to do it. And...

David Hart (21:36)
Well, what? Yeah, what is going to say real quick on what you're saying?

David Baker (21:37)
Or they think there's a lot of large equipment that has to do it.

David Hart (21:42)
⁓ what is the definition of forensic cleaning? According to Jeff Jones, it's the removal of soil, both visible and invisible on surfaces, vertical and horizontal in preparation for professional decontamination. Okay. Whether you're going to professionally decontaminate, whether it needs it or not, you've still cleaned it forensically to that point. It's a better clean.

David Baker (22:04)
your work-cation.

Bob Jordan, PE (22:04)
really quick there, David kind

of really quick to a a purchase of a complete system. I mean, it pays for itself the first two times you use it. And then it's just, you know, the gravy train as it were from then on. It's it really should be a part of any restoration company's arsenal of equipment and processes and offering. There's just so many applications for it.

and it pays very well and we got four guys that are way capable at it and then we got other people who help and assist as needed but it's just David Hart has thought this through he's figured it out everything works you don't kind of figure anything out you just start using it and that's what we're doing

David Baker (22:57)
Okay, well thank you Bob. Thanks for joining the second episode of Straight from the

Bob Jordan, PE (22:57)
Do it yourself.

You bet guys, it was a pleasure to be with you

